Rfc5 review response (#350)
ome/ngff: rfc/5/versions/1/index.md

Nevertheless, it can be useful to refer to the "raw" coordinates of the array.
Some applications might prefer to define points or regions-of-interest in "pixel coordinates" rather than "physical coordinates," for example.
Indicating that choice explicitly will be important for interoperability.
This is possible by using **array coordinate systems**.

Every array has a default coordinate system whose parameters need not be explicitly defined.
The dimensionality of each array coordinate system equals the dimensionality of its corresponding Zarr array.
Its name is the path to the array in the container,
its axes have `"type": "array"`, are unitless, and have default names.
The i-th axis has `"name": "dim_i"` (these are the same default names used by [xarray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/user-guide/terminology.html)).
As with all coordinate systems, the `dimension_names` must be unique and non-null.

````{admonition} Example
```json
{
    "name": "0",
    "axes": [
        {"name": "dim_0", "type": "array"},
        {"name": "dim_1", "type": "array"},
        {"name": "dim_2", "type": "array"}
    ]
}
```
````

> The axes and their order align with the `shape` attribute in the zarr array attributes (in `.zarray`),

Reviewer: Reference to .zarray is obsolete, I think?

in the discrete array, i.e., the area corresponding to nearest-neighbor (NN) interpolation of that sample.
The center of a 2d pixel corresponding to the origin `(0,0)` in the discrete array is the origin of the continuous coordinate
system `(0.0, 0.0)` (when the transformation is the identity). The continuous rectangle of the pixel is given by the
half-open interval `[-0.5, 0.5) x [-0.5, 0.5)` (i.e., -0.5 is included, +0.5 is excluded). See chapter 4 and figure 4.1 of the ITK Software Guide.

### "coordinateTransformations" metadata

"coordinateTransformations" describe the mapping between two coordinate systems (defined by "axes").
For example, to map an array's discrete coordinate system to its corresponding physical coordinates.
Coordinate transforms are in the "forward" direction. They represent functions from *points* in the
input space to *points* in the output space. 

- MUST contain the field "type".
- MUST contain any other fields required by the given "type" (see table below).
- MUST contain the field "output", unless part of a `sequence` or `inverseOf` (see details).

> - MUST contain the field "input", unless part of a `sequence` or `inverseOf` (see details).

Reviewer: Also maybe bijection?

        The values of <code>input</code> and <code>output</code> fields MUST be an array of strings.
        Every axis name in <code>input</code> MUST correspond to a name of some axis in this parent object's <code>input</code> coordinate system.
        Every axis name in the parent byDimension's <code>output</code> MUST appear in exactly one of its child transformations' <code>output</code>.
        </dd>
</dl>

#### <a name="bijection">bijection</a>

A bijection transformation is an invertible transformation in which both the `forward` and `inverse` transformations
are explicitly defined. Each direction SHOULD be a transformation type that is not closed-form invertible.
Its' input and output spaces MUST have equal dimension. The input and output dimensions for the both the forward
and inverse transformations MUST match bijection's input and output space dimensions.

`input` and `output` fields MAY be omitted for the `forward` and `inverse` transformations, in which case
the `forward` transformation's `input` and `output` are understood to match the bijection's, and the `inverse`

> transformation's `input` (`output`) matches the bijection's `output` (`input`), see the example below.

Reviewer: Should clarify whether the bijection's `input` and `output` must be specified (like for sequence).

The "dimensionality" of a coordinate system is indicated by the length of its "axes" array.
The "volume_micrometers" example coordinate system above is three dimensional (3D).

````{admonition} Example

Coordinate Systems metadata example

```json
{
    "name" : "volume_micrometers",
    "axes" : [
        {"name": "z", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"},
        {"name": "y", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"},
        {"name": "x", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"}
    ]
}
```
````

The axes of a coordinate system (see below) give information
about the types, units, and other properties of the coordinate system's dimensions.
Axis `name`s may contain semantically meaningful information, but can be arbitrary.
As a result, two coordinate systems that have identical axes in the same order 
ay not be "the same" in the sense that measurements at the same point
refer to different physical entities and therefore should not be analyzed jointly.
Tasks that require images, annotations, regions of interest, etc.,
SHOULD ensure that they are in the same coordinate system (same name, with identical axes)
or can be transformed to the same coordinate system before doing analysis.

> See the example below.

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to add a link since it's not clear to me what this example is?

- MAY contain the field "discrete".
  The value MUST be a boolean,
  and is `true` if the axis represents a discrete dimension.
- SHOULD contain the field "unit" to specify the physical unit of this dimension.
  The value SHOULD be one of the following strings,
  which are valid units according to UDUNITS-2.
    - Units for "space" axes: 'angstrom', 'attometer', 'centimeter', 'decimeter', 'exameter', 'femtometer', 'foot', 'gigameter', 'hectometer', 'inch', 'kilometer', 'megameter', 'meter', 'micrometer', 'mile', 'millimeter', 'nanometer', 'parsec', 'petameter', 'picometer', 'terameter', 'yard', 'yoctometer', 'yottameter', 'zeptometer', 'zettameter'
    - Units for "time" axes: 'attosecond', 'centisecond', 'day', 'decisecond', 'exasecond', 'femtosecond', 'gigasecond', 'hectosecond', 'hour', 'kilosecond', 'megasecond', 'microsecond', 'millisecond', 'minute', 'nanosecond', 'petasecond', 'picosecond', 'second', 'terasecond', 'yoctosecond', 'yottasecond', 'zeptosecond', 'zettasecond'
- MAY contain the field "longName".
  The value MUST be a string,
  and can provide a longer name or description of an axis and its properties.

> If part of metadata, the length of "axes" MUST be equal to the number of dimensions of the arrays that contain the image data.

Reviewer 2: Part of which metadata? Because this isn't a constraint on a a single Axes object, I think it makes sense to move the constraint to the structure where it applies.

Reviewer 2: 👍

### "coordinateTransformations" metadata

"coordinateTransformations" describe the mapping between two coordinate systems (defined by "axes").
For example, to map an array's discrete coordinate system to its corresponding physical coordinates.
Coordinate transforms are in the "forward" direction.
They represent functions from *points* in the input space to *points* in the output space. 

- MUST contain the field "type" (string).
- MUST contain any other fields required by the given "type" (see table below).
- MUST contain the field "output" (string),
  unless part of a `sequence` or `inverseOf` (see details).
- MUST contain the field "input" (string),
  unless part of a `sequence` or `inverseOf` (see details).
- MAY contain the field "name" (string).
  Its value MUST be unique across all "name" fields for coordinate transformations.
- Parameter values MUST be compatible with input and output space dimensionality (see details).

The following transformations are supported:

| Type | Fields | Description |
|------|--------|-------------|
| `identity` | | The identity transformation is the default transformation and is typically not explicitly defined. |

> | `mapAxis` | `"mapAxis":List[number]` | A `mapAxis` transformation specifies an axis permutation as a transpose array of integer indices that refer to the ordering of the axes in the respective coordinate system. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `mapAxis` | `"mapAxis":List[number]` | an axis permutation as a transpose array of integer indices that refer to the ordering of the axes in the respective coordinate system. |
```
for brevity

| `translation` | one of:<br>`"translation":List[number]`,<br>`"path":str` | translation vector, stored either as a list of numbers (`"translation"`) or as binary data at a location in this container (`path`). |

> | `scale` | one of:<br>`"scale":List[number]`,<br>`"path":str` | scale vector, stored either as a list of numbers (`scale`) or as binary data at a location in this container (`path`). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `scale` | one of:<br>`"scale":List[number]`,<br>`"path":str` | Scale vector, stored either as a list of numbers (`scale`) or as binary data at a location in this container (`path`). |
```

| `affine` | one of:<br>`"affine": List[List[number]]`,<br>`"path":str` | affine transformation matrix stored as a flat array stored either with json using the affine field or as binary data at a location in this container (path). If both are present, the binary values at path should be used. |
| `rotation` | one of:<br>`"rotation":List[List[number]]`,<br>`"path":str` | rotation transformation matrix stored as an array stored either with json or as binary data at a location in this container (path). If both are present, the binary parameters at path are used. |
| `sequence` | `"transformations":List[Transformation]` | A sequence of transformations, Applying the sequence applies the composition of all transforms in the list, in order. |
| `displacements` | `"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str` | Displacement field transformation located at (path). |

> | `coordinates` | `"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str` | Coordinate field transformation located at (path). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `coordinates` | `"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str` | Coordinate field transformation located at `path`. |
```

> | `inverseOf` | `"transformation":Transformation` | The inverse of a transformation. Useful if a transform is not closed-form invertible. See Forward and inverse for details and examples. |

Reviewer 2: What is "Forward and inverese"? It doesn't seem to be another section in this document.

Author: See a8f87138d8d2de5f5d982768f8cb2342c73f2cff

| `bijection` | `"forward":Transformation`<br>`"inverse":Transformation` | Explicitly define an invertible transformation by providing a forward transformation and its inverse. |

> | `byDimension` | `"transformations":List[Transformation]`, <br> `"input_axes": List[str]`, <br> `"output_axes": List[str]` | Define a high dimensional transformation using lower dimensional transformations on subsets of dimensions. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `byDimension` | `"transformations":List[Transformation]`, <br> `"input_axes": List[str]`, <br> `"output_axes": List[str]` | A high dimensional transformation using lower dimensional transformations on subsets of dimensions. |
```

Conforming readers:
- MUST parse `identity`, `scale`, `translation` transformations;
- SHOULD parse `mapAxis`, `affine`, `rotation` transformations;
- SHOULD display an informative warning if encountering transformations that cannot be parsed;
- SHOULD be able to apply transformations to points;
- SHOULD be able to apply transformations to images;

Coordinate transformations can be stored in multiple places to reflect different usecases.
     

> - Multiscale transformations represent a special case of transformations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Transformations in indvidual mutliscale datasets represent a special case of transformations
```
To be more precise

  and are explained [below](#multiscales-metadata).
- Additional transformations for single images MUST be stored under a field `coordinateTransformations`
  in the multiscales dictionaries.
  This `coordinateTransformations` field MUST contain a list of valid [transformations](#transformation-types).
- Transformations between two or more images MUST be stored in the attributes of a parent zarr group.
  For transformations that store data or parameters in a zarr array,
  those zarr arrays SHOULD be stored in a zarr group `coordinateTransformations`.

Implementations SHOULD prefer to store transformations as a sequence of less expressive transformations
(i.e., sequence[translation, rotation] instead of affine transformation with translation/rotation) component. 

<pre>
store.zarr                      # Root folder of the zarr store
│
├── zarr.json                   # coordinate transformations describing the relationship between two image coordinate systems
│                               # are stored in the attributes of their parent group.

> │                               # transformations between 'volume' and 'crop' coordinate systems are stored here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
│                               # transformations between coordinate systems in the 'volume' and 'crop' multiscale images are stored here.
```

│
├── coordinateTransformations   # transformations that use array storage go in a "coordinateTransformations" zarr group.
│   └── displacements           # for example, a zarr array containing a displacement field
│       └── zarr.json
│
├── volume
│   ├── zarr.json              # group level attributes (multiscales)
│   └── 0                       # a group containing the 0th scale
│       └── image               # a zarr array
│           └── zarr.json      # physical coordinate system and transformations here
└── crop
    ├── zarr.json              # group level attributes (multiscales)
    └── 0                       # a group containing the 0th scale
        └── image               # a zarr array
            └── zarr.json      # physical coordinate system and transformations here
</pre>

````{admonition} Example
Two instruments simultaneously image the same sample from two different angles,
and the 3D data from both instruments are calibrated to "micrometer" units.

> Two samples are collected ("sampleA" and "sampleB").

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
sampleB is never again mentioned after here, so I think fine to delete this sentence?

An analysis of sample A requires measurements from both instruments' images at certain points in space.
Suppose a region of interest (ROI) is determined from the image obtained from instrument 2,
but quantification from that region is needed for instrument 1.
Since measurements were collected at different angles,
a measurement by instrument 1 at the point with coordinates (x,y,z)
may not correspond to the measurement at the same point in instrument 2
(i.e., it may not be the same physical location in the sample).

> To analyze both images together, they must be in the same coordinate system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To analyze both images together, they must be transformed to a common coordinate system.
```

The set of coordinate transformations encodes relationships between coordinate systems,

> specifically, how to convert points and images to different coordinate systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
specifically, how to convert points from one coordinate system to another.
```
transforms do not direclty transform images; they transform points, which are then used to transform images (usually by interpolation on to the transformed points).

    {
        "name": "sampleA-instrument1",
        "axes": [
            {"name": "z", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"},
            {"name": "y", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"},
            {"name": "x", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"}
        ]
    },
]
```

The image under `root/sampleA_instrument2` would have this as the first listed coordinate system:

```json
[
    {
        "name": "sampleA-instrument2",
        "axes": [
            {"name": "z", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"},
            {"name": "y", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"},
            {"name": "x", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer"}
        ]
    }
],
```
````

#### Additional details

Most coordinate transformations MUST specify their input and output coordinate systems
using `input` and `output` with a string value
that MUST correspond to the name of a coordinate system or the path to a multiscales group.
Exceptions are if the coordinate transformation appears in the `transformations` list of a `sequence`
or is the `transformation` of an `inverseOf` transformation.
In these two cases input and output could, in some cases, be omitted (see below for details).

> If used in a parent-level zarr-group, the `input` field MUST be a path to the input image. 

Reviewer 2: If there isn't a technical reason to have the restriction, I'd be pro removing it. I can see a situation where you might want to have two coordinate systems that are linked by transforms like:

image --> system_1 --> system_2

and wanting the option to view the image in system_1 or system_2, which would require defining system_2 that has an input that isn't the path to an image.

and the `inverse` transformation's `input` (`output`) matches the bijection's `output` (`input`),
see the example below.

The `input` and `output` fields MAY be omitted for `bijection` transformations
if the fields may be omitted for both its `forward` and `inverse` transformations

Practically, non-invertible transformations have finite extents,
so bijection transforms should only be expected to be correct / consistent for points that fall within those extents.
It may not be correct for any point of appropriate dimensionality.

### "multiscales" metadata

Metadata about an image can be found under the `multiscales` key in the group-level OME-Zarr Metadata.
Here, "image" refers to 2 to 5 dimensional data representing image
or volumetric data with optional time or channel axes.
It is stored in a multiple resolution representation.

`multiscales` contains a list of dictionaries where each entry describes a multiscale image.

Each `multiscales` dictionary MUST contain the field "coordinateSystems",
whose value is an array containing valid coordinate system metadata
(see [coordinate systems](#coordinatesystems-metadata)).

> The last entry of this array is the "default" coordinate system

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last entry of this array is the "base" coordinate system
```
I got quite confused here, because this is the same coordinate system that all the multiscale arrays are transformed into, but not the "default" coordinate system for the multiscales (that is the first entry of the array) described above. So I suggest changing this to "base" to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 2: Yes, exactly. "intrinsic" is a good name 👍

> and MUST contain transformations from array to physical coordinates.

Author: Yeah, I think that's flawed wording. The `coordinateSystem` doesn't hold any transformations. Better:

> The last entry of this array is the "default" coordinate system
and MUST contain axis information pertaining to physical coordinates.

the spatial axes SHOULD be ordered as "zyx".

Each `multiscales` dictionary MUST contain the field `datasets`,
which is a list of dictionaries describing the arrays storing the individual resolution levels.
Each dictionary in `datasets` MUST contain the field `path`,
whose value is a string containing the path to the Zarr array for this resolution relative to the current Zarr group.
The `path`s MUST be ordered from largest (i.e. highest resolution) to smallest.
Every Zarr array referred to by a `path` MUST have the same number of dimensions
and MUST NOT have more than 5 dimensions.
The number of dimensions and order MUST correspond to number and order of `axes`.

Each dictionary in `datasets` MUST contain the field `coordinateTransformations`,
whose value is a list of dictionaries that define a transformation
that maps Zarr array coordinates for this resolution level to the "default" coordinate system
(the last entry of the `coordinateSystems` array).
The transformation is defined according to [transformations metadata](#transformation-types).
The transformation MUST take as input points in the array coordinate system
corresponding to the Zarr array at location `path`.

> The value of "input" SHOULD equal the value of `path`,

Reviewer 2: Why SHOULD and not MUST here?

but implementations should always treat the value of `input` as if it were equal to the value of `path`.

> The value of the transformation’s `output` MUST be the name of the default [coordinate system](#coordinatesystems-metadata).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value of the transformation’s `output` MUST be the name of the base [coordinate system](#coordinatesystems-metadata).
```

This transformation MUST be one of the following:

* A single scale or identity transformation
* A sequence transformation containing one scale and one translation transformation.

In these cases, the scale transformation specifies the pixel size in physical units or time duration.
If scaling information is not available or applicable for one of the axes,
the value MUST express the scaling factor between the current resolution
and the first resolution for the given axis,
defaulting to 1.0 if there is no downsampling along the axis.
This is strongly recommended

> so that the the "default" coordinate system of the imageavoids more complex transformations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so that the the "default" coordinate system of the image avoids more complex transformations.
```

If applications require additional transformations,
each `multiscales` dictionary MAY contain the field `coordinateTransformations`,
describing transformations that are applied to all resolution levels in the same manner.
The value of `input` MUST equal the name of the "default" coordinate system.
The value of `output` MUST be the name of the output coordinate System

> which is different from the "default" coordinate system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which is different from the "base" coordinate system.
```

Each `multiscales` dictionary SHOULD contain the field `type`,
which gives the type of downscaling method used to generate the multiscale image pyramid.
It SHOULD contain the field "metadata",
which contains a dictionary with additional information about the downscaling method.

````{admonition} Example

A complete example of json-file for a 5D (TCZYX) multiscales with 3 resolution levels could look like this:

```json
{
  "zarr_format": 3,
  "node_type": "group",
  "attributes": {
    "ome": {
      "version": "0.5",
      "multiscales": [
        {
          "name": "example",
          "coordinateSystems": [
              {
                "name": "example",
                "axes": [
                  { "name": "t", "type": "time", "unit": "millisecond" },
                  { "name": "c", "type": "channel" },
                  { "name": "z", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer" },
                  { "name": "y", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer" },
                  { "name": "x", "type": "space", "unit": "micrometer" }
                ]
              }
          ],
          "datasets": [
            {
              "path": "0",

>               "coordinateTransformations": {

Reviewer 2: Above it was specified this was a list of dicts, but this is only a dict.

| `scale` | one of:<br>`"scale":List[number]`,<br>`"path":str` | scale vector, stored either as a list of numbers (`scale`) or as binary data at a location in this container (`path`). |
| `affine` | one of:<br>`"affine": List[List[number]]`,<br>`"path":str` | affine transformation matrix stored as a flat array stored either with json using the affine field or as binary data at a location in this container (path). If both are present, the binary values at path should be used. |
| `rotation` | one of:<br>`"rotation":List[List[number]]`,<br>`"path":str` | rotation transformation matrix stored as an array stored either with json or as binary data at a location in this container (path). If both are present, the binary parameters at path are used. |
| `sequence` | `"transformations":List[Transformation]` | A sequence of transformations, Applying the sequence applies the composition of all transforms in the list, in order. |
| `displacements` | `"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str` | Displacement field transformation located at (path). |
| `coordinates` | `"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str` | Coordinate field transformation located at (path). |

> | `inverseOf` | `"transform":Transform` | The inverse of a transformation. Useful if a transform is not closed-form invertible. See Forward and inverse for details and examples. |

Reviewer 3: The `transform` name in the table doesn't correspond with `transformation` at https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/350/files#diff-a3a596c95eb18d20c2f87ade777e5517c8da48b6d8968095369f5ce89345768dR396 and elsewhere.

Author: Fixed in b891549fa92d7a48a362880d43ffe90ab4fc1479 and [a5dba](https://github.com/jo-mueller/ngff-rfc5-coordinate-transformation-examples/commit/1fa081f208ed08077bf021240cfdbb9b774a5dba) on the examples repo
